.TH GIT-AI-COMMIT 1 "16 November 2025" "ai-commit 0.1"
.SH NAME
git-ai-commit \- AI-powered helper to generate git commit messages
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B git ai-commit
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B git-ai-commit
is a small helper that analyzes staged changes and the repository commit history
and uses an AI model to suggest a concise, conventional commit message.

The tool is intended to be installed as a git subcommand (e.g. a file named
"git-ai-commit" in your PATH) so it can be invoked as
.B git ai-commit.

.SH OPTIONS
The following options are supported (common ones shown):
.TP
.B \-\-auto-commit
Automatically commit without asking for confirmation.
.TP
.B \-\-dry-run
Generate the message but do not run the commit.
.TP
.B \-\-analyze
Analyze recent commits and write a small per-repo style cache to
.I .git/ai-commit-style.json
.TP
.B \-\-history-depth <n>
Number of commits to scan when analyzing history. Default: 1000.
.TP
.B \-\-cache-file <path>
Path to the style cache file (default: .git/ai-commit-style.json).
.TP
.B \-\-force-analyze
Ignore any existing cache and analyze history before generating the message.
.TP
.B \-\-context <text>
Additional context to pass to the AI to influence the generated message.
.TP
.B \-\-guidelines <text|path|url>
Project-specific commit guidelines. Can be:
.RS
\- Inline text (quoted on the command line)
\- Path to a local file whose contents will be used
\- An http(s) URL which will be downloaded and used
.RE
When provided, guidelines are cached into the repository style cache and used
on subsequent runs.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Generate a message and commit interactively:
.nf
$ git add file.py
$ git ai-commit
.fi
.TP
Preview the suggested message without committing:
.nf
$ git ai-commit --dry-run
.fi
.TP
Provide project guidelines from a local file:
.nf
$ git ai-commit --guidelines ./COMMIT_GUIDELINES.md
.fi
.TP
Provide guidelines from a URL:
.nf
$ git ai-commit --guidelines https://example.com/COMMIT_POLICY.md
.fi
.SH INSTALLATION
To install as a git subcommand, copy the script into a file named
"git-ai-commit" and make it executable, then place it on your PATH, for
example:
.nf
$ chmod +x git-ai-commit
$ mv git-ai-commit ~/.local/bin/
.fi
If you want the manual page to be available via the man command, copy the
provided man page into your local man directory (requires root for system
paths):
.nf
# copy to system man directory (may require sudo)
$ sudo cp man/git-ai-commit.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
$ sudo mandb
.fi
Or install for your local user:
.nf
$ mkdir -p ~/.local/share/man/man1
$ cp man/git-ai-commit.1 ~/.local/share/man/man1/
$ mandb --user
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
git(1), git-commit(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by the ai-commit project.
